Food Safety in Your Kitchen | FDA Skip to main content Skip to FDA Search Skip to in this section menu Skip to footer links Home Food Resources for You (Food) Consumers Buy, Store & Serve Safe Food Food Safety in Your Kitchen Buy, Store & Serve Safe Food In this section When you prepare meals and snacks for yourself, your family, and your friends, it is important to follow simple food safety tips to help prevent foodborne illness, also known as “food poisoning.” Whether you are a home cook, a professional chef, or a recipe writer, there are some easy steps you can take to help keep your food safe all the way from the grocery store to the kitchen table. On this page: Food Safe Shopping, Storage and Meal Prep Delicious and Healthy Recipes You Can Make at Home Resources for Recipe Writers Resources for Food Safety Educators Social Media Toolkit Remember that food safety starts at the grocery store. Check out these lists of DOs and DON’Ts to help keep food safe from the grocery cart to the refrigerator. # Food Safe Shopping, Storage and Meal Prep Download Food Safe Shopping & Storage Descargar En español (Spanish) Download Food Safe Meal Prep Descargar En español (Spanish) back to top # Delicious and Healthy Recipes You Can Make at Home Not sure what to cook? Try these recipes and follow the food safety tips along the way for a healthy and tasty meal at home! Recipe: Grilled Tuna with Chickpea and Spinach Salad Atun a la parrilla con ensalada de garbanzos y espinaca Recipe: Chicken and Mushroom Fricassee Fricase de pollo con setas Recipe: Pumpkin Pie Tarta de calabaza Recipe:Quinoa-Stuffed Tomatoes Tomates rellenos de quinua # Resources for Recipe Writers Do you write recipes for a blog, restaurant, cookbook, or just family and friends? Did you know that when recipes include food safety tips, people are more likely to follow those steps and cook their foods safety? Check out these tips to help make sure your recipes include important food safety information and are healthy and delicious! Food Safety in the Kitchen: Tips for Writing Food Safe Recipes (PDF: 1.5MB) , En español (Spanish) (PDF: 1.49MB) Food Safety in the Kitchen: Cooking with Nutritious Ingredients (PDF: 2.71MB) , En español (Spanish) (PDF: 2.69MB) # Resources for Food Safety Educators Does your organization care about food safety? Do you want to help spread the word about making safe meals at home? Check out our streaming waiting room video below and our Food Safety Toolkit for resources to share food safety information on social media and on your website. Audio version # Social Media Toolkit Right click on the image and then download it. Image 1 Image 2 Tweets for Consumers: Learning the do’s and don’ts of food-safe meal prep can help prevent foodborne illness. Start putting them into practice to protect you and your family. https://go.usa.gov/xUFYq [Use Image One] Food safety starts in your shopping cart! Keep produce separate from meat, poultry, seafood, and eggs in your shopping cart and in your grocery bags. https://go.usa.gov/xUFYq [Use Image Two] DYK that when recipes include #foodsafety tips, people are more likely to follow them and cook their food safely? If you write #recipes, use these tips to help prevent the spread of #foodborneillness. #chef #recipe https://go.usa.gov/xUFYq Do you enjoy creating delicious recipes to share with others? Here are some tips for how to include more healthy ingredients and food safety steps! https://go.usa.gov/xUFYq back to top # Content current as of: 03/05/2024 # Regulated Product(s) Food & Beverages Feedback Back to Top