The Eatwell Guide - GOV.UK # Cookies on GOV.UK We use some essential cookies to make this website work. We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services. We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services. You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies View cookies Hide cookie message Skip to main content Guidance The Eatwell Guide The Eatwell Guide is a policy tool used to define government recommendations on eating healthily and achieving a balanced diet. From: Office for Health Improvement and Disparities Published: 17 March 2016 Last updated: 2 January 2024 &#8212; See all updates Get emails about this page Documents Eatwell Guide: colour PDF PDF , 7.81 MB , 1 page This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology. Request an accessible format If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@dhsc.gov.uk . Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use. Government dietary recommendations PDF , 148 KB , 12 pages This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology. Request an accessible format If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@dhsc.gov.uk . Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use. The Eatwell Guide: how does it differ to the eatwell plate and why? PDF , 69.5 KB , 6 pages This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology. Request an accessible format If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@dhsc.gov.uk . Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use. From Plate to Guide: What, why and how for the eatwell model PDF , 1.03 MB , 37 pages This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology. Request an accessible format If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@dhsc.gov.uk . Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use. From Plate to Guide: annex 1 PDF , 2.02 MB , 22 pages This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology. Request an accessible format If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@dhsc.gov.uk . Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use. From Plate to Guide: annex 2 PDF , 1.22 MB , 61 pages This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology. Request an accessible format If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@dhsc.gov.uk . Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use. The Eatwell Guide booklet PDF , 7.52 MB , 12 pages This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology. Request an accessible format If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@dhsc.gov.uk . Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use. The Eatwell Guide: how to use in promotional material HTML Eatwell Guide: greyscale PDF PDF , 7.5 MB , 1 page This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology. Request an accessible format If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@dhsc.gov.uk . Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use. Eatwell Guide: colour JPG JPEG , 8.74 MB This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology. Request an accessible format If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@dhsc.gov.uk . Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use. Eatwell Guide: EPS version EPS , 24.2 MB This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology. Request an accessible format If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@dhsc.gov.uk . Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use. A quick guide to the government’s healthy eating recommendations PDF , 712 KB , 12 pages This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology. Request an accessible format If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@dhsc.gov.uk . Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use. Details The UK’s national food guide has been updated in light of recent recommendations made by the Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition ( SACN ) in their report on Carbohydrates and Health published in July 2015 . The Eatwell Guide has replaced the eatwell plate and continues to define the government’s advice on a healthy balanced diet. The Eatwell Guide is a visual representation of how different foods and drinks can contribute towards a healthy balanced diet. The Eatwell Guide is based on the 5 food groups and shows how much of what you eat should come from each food group. The Office for Health Improvement and Disparities (previously Public Health England) encourages organisations and individuals to use the Eatwell Guide to make sure everyone receives consistent messages about the balance of foods in a healthy diet. This publication provides guidance on using the Eatwell Guide in promotional materials. The Carbon Trust sustainability assessment indicated that the Eatwell Guide shows an appreciably lower environmental impact than the current UK diet. # Updates to this page Published 17 March 2016 Last updated 2 January 2024 &#8212; Show all updates 2 January 2024 Updated out-of-date Public Health England references and changed page owner to the Office for Health Improvement and Disparities. 25 September 2018 Updated version of the &#39;Eatwell Guide&#39; booklet and &#39;Quick guide to the government&#39;s healthy eating recommendations&#39; published. 28 February 2017 Added &#39;A quick guide to the government’s healthy eating recommendations&#39;. 9 December 2016 Uploaded the Eatwell guide report and annexes. 24 August 2016 Added dietary recommendations. 18 March 2016 Add EPS version of Eatwell Guide. 17 March 2016 First published. Sign up for emails or print this page Get emails about this page Print this page # Is this page useful? Maybe Yes this page is useful No this page is not useful Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page # Help us improve GOV.UK Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel # Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab and requires JavaScript ) . Cancel