Safe Minimum Internal Temperature Chart | Food Safety and Inspection Service Sorry, you need to enable JavaScript to visit this website. Skip navigation The .gov means it’s official. Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site. The site is secure. The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely. ALERT: Sempio Food Services Inc. Recalls Ready… See more details Food Safety Recalls & Public Health Alerts Report a Problem with Food Additional Recalls Annual Recall Summaries Summary of Recall and PHA Cases in Calendar Year 2025 Summary of Recall and PHA Cases in Calendar Year 2024 Summary of Recall and PHA Cases in Calendar Year 2023 Summary of Recall and PHA Cases in Calendar Year 2022 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2021 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2020 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2019 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2018 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2017 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2016 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2015 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2014 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2013 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2012 Food Safety Stats Consumer Research Foodborne Illness and Disease Enfermedades Transmitidas Por Alimentos y Otras Enfermedades Illnesses and Pathogens Botulism Campylobacter E. coli Listeria Parasites and Foodborne Illness Preguntas y Respuestas Sobre Listeria Salmonella Resources for Public Health Partners State Departments of Public Health Outbreaks Outbreak Investigations: Prevention Outbreak Investigations: Response Safe Food Handling and Preparation Food Safety Basics Additives in Meat and Poultry Products Air Fryers and Food Safety Appliance Thermometers Cleanliness Helps Prevent Foodborne Illness Cooking for Groups Cooking with Microwave Ovens Cutting Boards Danger Zone 40F - 140F Deep Fat Frying Doneness Versus Safety Food Allergies: The “Big 9” Food Thermometers Glossary of Packaging Terms Grilling Food Safely Grilling and Food Safety High Altitude Cooking How Temperatures Affect Food How to Find the USDA Establishment Number Importing Meat, Poultry & Egg Products US Irradiation and Food Safety FAQ Keeping &quot;Bag&quot; Lunches Safe Keeping Food Safe During an Emergency Mail Order Food Safety Meat and Poultry Labeling Terms Meat and Poultry Packaging Materials Molds on Food: Are They Dangerous? Natural Flavors on Meat and Poultry Labels Safe Handling of Take-Out Foods Slow Cookers and Food Safety Smoking Meat and Poultry Tailgating Food Safety Q & A Understanding FSIS Food Recalls Water in Meat & Poultry Food Product Dating Freezing and Food Safety Leftovers and Food Safety Refrigeration Safe Temperature Chart Shelf-Stable Food The Big Thaw — Safe Defrosting Methods The Color of Meat and Poultry Washing Food: Does it Promote Food Safety? Food Safety While Hiking, Camping & Boating Conceptos Básicos de Seguridad Alimentaria Your Guide to Safe Spring Holiday Meals Meat & Catfish Bacon and Food Safety Beef From Farm To Table Bison from Farm to Table Catfish from Farm to Table Color of Cooked Ground Beef as It Relates to Doneness Corned Beef Door-to-Door Meat Sales Fresh Pork from Farm to Table Goat from Farm to Table Ground Beef and Food Safety Hams and Food Safety Hot Dogs & Food Safety Jerky Lamb From Farm to Table Mechanically Tenderized Beef Rabbit From Farm to Table Roasting Those &quot;Other&quot; Holiday Meats Sausages and Food Safety Veal from Farm to Table Yersiniosis and Chitterlings Tips Carne y Bagre Poultry Your Safe Thanksgiving Guide Chicken From Farm to Table Chicken Liver Duck and Goose from Farm to Table Hock Locks and Other Accoutrements Is Pink Turkey Meat Safe? Let&#039;s Talk Turkey Roasting Poultry Processing: Questions & Answers Poultry: Basting, Brining, and Marinating Stuffing and Food Safety The Poultry Label Says &quot;Fresh&quot; Turduckens Require Safe Food Handling Turkey Basics: Handling Cooked Dinners Turkey Basics: Safe Cooking Turkey Basics: Safe Thawing Turkey Basics: Stuffing Turkey from Farm to Table Turkey: Alternate Routes to the Table Aves de Corral Eggs Egg Products and Food Safety Shell Eggs from Farm to Table Huevos Emergencies A Consumer&#039;s Guide to Food Safety: Severe Storms and Hurricanes Fires and Food Safety Keep Your Food Safe During Emergencies Removing Odors from Refrigerators and Freezers USDA Meat and Poultry Hotline Brochures & Publications Food Defense and Emergency Response Emergency Response Continuity of Operations (COOP) Food Defense Risk Mitigation Tool Food Defense Considerations for Transportation of FSIS-Regulated Products Food Defense Tools, Resources and Training Functional Food Defense Plans International Food Defense Subscribe for Updates Call Our Hotline For help with meat, poultry, and egg products, call the toll-free USDA Meat and Poultry Hotline: 1-888-MPHOTLINE 1-888-674-6854 Report a Problem with Food Online If you have a problem with a food product, let FSIS know or find the appropriate public health organization. Report Problem # Safe Minimum Internal Temperature Chart Safe steps in food handling, cooking and storage are essential in preventing foodborne illness. You can't see, smell or taste harmful bacteria that may cause illness. In every step of food preparation, follow the four guidelines to keep food safe: Clean — Wash hands and surfaces often. Separate — Separate raw meat from other foods. Cook — Cook to the right temperature. Chill — Refrigerate food promptly. Cook all food to these minimum internal temperatures, as measured with a food thermometer, before removing food from the heat source. For reasons of personal preference, consumers may choose to cook food to higher temperatures. Product Minimum Internal Temperature and Rest Time Beef, Pork, Veal and Lamb Steaks, Chops and Roasts 145 degrees F (62.8 degrees C) and allow to rest for at least 3 minutes Ground Meats 160 degrees F (71.1 degrees C) Ground Poultry 165 degrees F Ham, Fresh or Smoked (Uncooked) 145 degrees F (62.8 degrees C) and allow to rest for at least 3 minutes Fully Cooked Ham (to Reheat) Reheat cooked hams packaged in USDA-inspected plants to 140 degrees F (60 degrees C) and all others to 165 degrees F (73.9 degrees C). All Poultry (Breasts, Whole Bird, Legs, Thighs, Wings, Ground Poultry, Giblets and Stuffing) 165 degrees F (73.9 degrees C) Eggs 160 degrees F (71.1 degrees C) Fish & Shellfish 145 degrees F (62.8 degrees C) Leftovers 165 degrees F (73.9 degrees C) Casseroles 165 degrees F (73.9 degrees C) # Featured Factsheets & Resources Slow Cookers and Food Safety At any time of year, a slow cooker can make life a little more convenient because by planning ahead, you save time later. Learn More Cleanliness Helps Prevent Foodborne Illness Cleanliness is a major factor in preventing foodborne illness. Washing hands with warm water and soap for at least 20 seconds can help eliminate germs from your hands. Learn More Leftovers and Food Safety Handle leftovers with care: make sure the food is cooked to a safe temperature and refrigerate any leftovers promptly. Learn More Explore More Resources Last Updated: Apr 14, 2025 . Close # Start your search # Popular Topics Recalls Import & Export FSIS Directives FSIS Guidelines Petitions