Leftovers and Food Safety | Food Safety and Inspection Service Sorry, you need to enable JavaScript to visit this website. Skip navigation The .gov means it’s official. Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site. The site is secure. The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely. ALERT: Sempio Food Services Inc. Recalls Ready… See more details Food Safety Recalls & Public Health Alerts Report a Problem with Food Additional Recalls Annual Recall Summaries Summary of Recall and PHA Cases in Calendar Year 2025 Summary of Recall and PHA Cases in Calendar Year 2024 Summary of Recall and PHA Cases in Calendar Year 2023 Summary of Recall and PHA Cases in Calendar Year 2022 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2021 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2020 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2019 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2018 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2017 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2016 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2015 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2014 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2013 Summary of Recall Cases in Calendar Year 2012 Food Safety Stats Consumer Research Foodborne Illness and Disease Enfermedades Transmitidas Por Alimentos y Otras Enfermedades Illnesses and Pathogens Botulism Campylobacter E. coli Listeria Parasites and Foodborne Illness Preguntas y Respuestas Sobre Listeria Salmonella Resources for Public Health Partners State Departments of Public Health Outbreaks Outbreak Investigations: Prevention Outbreak Investigations: Response Safe Food Handling and Preparation Food Safety Basics Additives in Meat and Poultry Products Air Fryers and Food Safety Appliance Thermometers Cleanliness Helps Prevent Foodborne Illness Cooking for Groups Cooking with Microwave Ovens Cutting Boards Danger Zone 40F - 140F Deep Fat Frying Doneness Versus Safety Food Allergies: The “Big 9” Food Thermometers Glossary of Packaging Terms Grilling Food Safely Grilling and Food Safety High Altitude Cooking How Temperatures Affect Food How to Find the USDA Establishment Number Importing Meat, Poultry & Egg Products US Irradiation and Food Safety FAQ Keeping &quot;Bag&quot; Lunches Safe Keeping Food Safe During an Emergency Mail Order Food Safety Meat and Poultry Labeling Terms Meat and Poultry Packaging Materials Molds on Food: Are They Dangerous? Natural Flavors on Meat and Poultry Labels Safe Handling of Take-Out Foods Slow Cookers and Food Safety Smoking Meat and Poultry Tailgating Food Safety Q & A Understanding FSIS Food Recalls Water in Meat & Poultry Food Product Dating Freezing and Food Safety Leftovers and Food Safety Refrigeration Safe Temperature Chart Shelf-Stable Food The Big Thaw — Safe Defrosting Methods The Color of Meat and Poultry Washing Food: Does it Promote Food Safety? Food Safety While Hiking, Camping & Boating Conceptos Básicos de Seguridad Alimentaria Your Guide to Safe Spring Holiday Meals Meat & Catfish Bacon and Food Safety Beef From Farm To Table Bison from Farm to Table Catfish from Farm to Table Color of Cooked Ground Beef as It Relates to Doneness Corned Beef Door-to-Door Meat Sales Fresh Pork from Farm to Table Goat from Farm to Table Ground Beef and Food Safety Hams and Food Safety Hot Dogs & Food Safety Jerky Lamb From Farm to Table Mechanically Tenderized Beef Rabbit From Farm to Table Roasting Those &quot;Other&quot; Holiday Meats Sausages and Food Safety Veal from Farm to Table Yersiniosis and Chitterlings Tips Carne y Bagre Poultry Your Safe Thanksgiving Guide Chicken From Farm to Table Chicken Liver Duck and Goose from Farm to Table Hock Locks and Other Accoutrements Is Pink Turkey Meat Safe? Let&#039;s Talk Turkey Roasting Poultry Processing: Questions & Answers Poultry: Basting, Brining, and Marinating Stuffing and Food Safety The Poultry Label Says &quot;Fresh&quot; Turduckens Require Safe Food Handling Turkey Basics: Handling Cooked Dinners Turkey Basics: Safe Cooking Turkey Basics: Safe Thawing Turkey Basics: Stuffing Turkey from Farm to Table Turkey: Alternate Routes to the Table Aves de Corral Eggs Egg Products and Food Safety Shell Eggs from Farm to Table Huevos Emergencies A Consumer&#039;s Guide to Food Safety: Severe Storms and Hurricanes Fires and Food Safety Keep Your Food Safe During Emergencies Removing Odors from Refrigerators and Freezers USDA Meat and Poultry Hotline Brochures & Publications Food Defense and Emergency Response Emergency Response Continuity of Operations (COOP) Food Defense Risk Mitigation Tool Food Defense Considerations for Transportation of FSIS-Regulated Products Food Defense Tools, Resources and Training Functional Food Defense Plans International Food Defense Subscribe for Updates Call Our Hotline For help with meat, poultry, and egg products, call the toll-free USDA Meat and Poultry Hotline: 1-888-MPHOTLINE 1-888-674-6854 Report a Problem with Food Online If you have a problem with a food product, let FSIS know or find the appropriate public health organization. Report Problem # Leftovers and Food Safety Often when we cook at home or eat in a restaurant, we have leftovers. To ensure that leftovers are safe to eat, make sure the food is cooked to a safe temperature and refrigerate the leftovers promptly. Not cooking food to a safe temperature and leaving food out at an unsafe temperature are the two main causes of foodborne illness. Safe handling of leftovers is very important to reducing foodborne illness. Follow the USDA Food Safety and Inspection Service's recommendations for handling leftovers safely. Cook Food Safely at Home Keep Food out of the Danger Zone Cool Food Rapidly Wrap Leftovers Well Store Leftovers Safely Thaw Frozen Leftovers Safely Reheating Leftovers without Thawing Reheat Leftovers Safely Refreezing Previously Frozen Leftovers # Cook Food Safely at Home The first step in having safe leftovers is cooking the food safely. Use a food thermometer to make sure that the food is cooked to a safe, minimum internal temperature. Red meats: Cook all raw beef, pork, lamb and veal steaks, chops, and roasts to a minimum internal temperature of 145° F as measured with a food thermometer before removing meat from the heat source. For safety and quality, allow meat to rest for at least three minutes before carving or consuming. For reasons of personal preference, consumers may choose to cook meat to higher temperatures. Ground meats: Cook all raw ground beef, pork, lamb, and veal to an internal temperature of 160° F as measured with a food thermometer. Poultry: Cook all poultry to an internal temperature of 165° F as measured with a food thermometer. Top of Page # Keep Food out of the Danger Zone Bacteria grow rapidly between the temperatures of 40° F and 140° F. After food is safely cooked, hot food must be kept hot at 140° F or warmer to prevent bacterial growth. Within 2 hours of cooking food or after it is removed from an appliance keeping it warm, leftovers must be refrigerated. Throw away all perishable foods that have been left in room temperature for more than 2 hours (1 hour if the temperature is over 90° F, such as at an outdoor picnic during summer). Cold perishable food, such as chicken salad or a platter of deli meats, should be kept at 40° F or below. When serving food at a buffet, keep food hot in chafing dishes, slow cookers, or warming trays. Keep food cold by nesting dishes in bowls of ice or use small serving trays and replace them often. Discard any cold leftovers that have been left out for more than 2 hours at room temperature (1 hour when the temperature is above 90 °F). Top of Page # Cool Food Rapidly To prevent bacterial growth, it's important to cool food rapidly so it reaches as fast as possible the safe refrigerator-storage temperature of 40° F or below. To do this, divide large amounts of food into shallow containers. A big pot of soup, for example, will take a long time to cool, inviting bacteria to multiply and increasing the danger of foodborne illness. Instead, divide the pot of soup into smaller containers so it will cool quickly. Cut large items of food into smaller portions to cool. For whole roasts or hams, slice or cut them into smaller parts. Cut turkey into smaller pieces and refrigerate. Slice breast meat; legs and wings may be left whole. Hot food can be placed directly in the refrigerator or be rapidly chilled in an ice or cold water bath before refrigerating. Top of Page # Wrap Leftovers Well Cover leftovers, wrap them in airtight packaging, or seal them in storage containers. These practices help keep bacteria out, retain moisture, and prevent leftovers from picking up odors from other food in the refrigerator. Immediately refrigerate or freeze the wrapped leftovers for rapid cooling. Top of Page # Store Leftovers Safely Leftovers can be kept in the refrigerator for 3 to 4 days or frozen for 3 to 4 months. Although safe indefinitely, frozen leftovers can lose moisture and flavor when stored for longer times in the freezer. Top of Page # Thaw Frozen Leftovers Safely Safe ways to thaw leftovers include the refrigerator, cold water and the microwave oven. Refrigerator thawing takes the longest but the leftovers stay safe the entire time. After thawing, the food should be used within 3 to 4 days or can be refrozen. Cold water thawing is faster than refrigerator thawing but requires more attention. The frozen leftovers must be in a leak-proof package or plastic bag. If the bag leaks, water can get into the food and bacteria from the air or surrounding environment could enter it. Foods thawed by the cold water method should be cooked before refreezing. Microwave thawing is the fastest method. When thawing leftovers in a microwave, continue to heat it until it reaches 165° F as measured with a food thermometer. Foods thawed in the microwave can be refrozen after heating it to this safe temperature. Top of Page # Reheating Leftovers without Thawing It is safe to reheat frozen leftovers without thawing, either in a saucepan or microwave (in the case of a soup or stew) or in the oven or microwave (for example, casseroles and combination meals). Reheating will take longer than if the food is thawed first, but it is safe to do when time is short. Top of Page # Reheat Leftovers Safely When reheating leftovers, be sure they reach 165° F as measured with a food thermometer. Reheat sauces, soups and gravies by bringing them to a rolling boil. Cover leftovers to reheat. This retains moisture and ensures that food will heat all the way through. When reheating in the microwave, cover and rotate the food for even heating. Arrange food items evenly in a covered microwave safe glass or ceramic dish, and add some liquid if needed. Be sure the covering is microwave safe, and vent the lid or wrap to let the steam escape. The moist heat that is created will help destroy harmful bacteria and will ensure uniform cooking. Also, because microwaves have cold spots, check the temperature of the food in several places with a food thermometer and allow a resting time before checking the internal temperature of the food with a food thermometer. Cooking continues for a longer time in dense foods such as a whole turkey or beef roast than in less dense foods like breads, small vegetables and fruits. Top of Page # Refreezing Previously Frozen Leftovers Sometimes there are leftover "leftovers." It is safe to refreeze any food remaining after reheating previously frozen leftovers to the safe temperature of 165° F as measured with a food thermometer. If a large container of leftovers was frozen and only a portion of it is needed, it is safe to thaw the leftovers in the refrigerator, remove the needed portion and refreeze the remainder of the thawed leftovers without reheating it. Top of Page # Featured Factsheets & Resources Slow Cookers and Food Safety At any time of year, a slow cooker can make life a little more convenient because by planning ahead, you save time later. Learn More Cleanliness Helps Prevent Foodborne Illness Cleanliness is a major factor in preventing foodborne illness. Washing hands with warm water and soap for at least 20 seconds can help eliminate germs from your hands. Learn More Leftovers and Food Safety Handle leftovers with care: make sure the food is cooked to a safe temperature and refrigerate any leftovers promptly. Learn More Explore More Resources Last Updated: Jul 31, 2020 . Close # Start your search # Popular Topics Recalls Import & Export FSIS Directives FSIS Guidelines Petitions